---
title: "Options Tactics V: Legging into spreads"
---

As a general life principle, you should only buy something in bulk if there is a discount. 

Otherwise, you should buy a product as the need arises. Circumstances, needs, and prices change over time, so there is value in flexibility. You may be able to find a better or more appropriate deal later on, especially if you have some knowledge about the pricing history of the product.

This is the high-level rationale for legging into spreads. Below I discuss a few strategies associated with the general concept of legging.



### If capital permits

The defensive leg of a spread is expensive precisely when the offensive leg is most profitable. It is irrational to open them simultaneously. If your capital permits it, you should open the offensive leg and defensive leg independently and opportunistically.

Note that if you are following the recommendation to [spend very little buying defensive spreads]({% post_url 2021-07-06-buying-premium %}), this is less of a concern. This is because the range in which you are going to buy the defensive leg is pretty much resistant to daily swings. In most situations, a one dollar contract will be one dollar regardless of that day's price swings. However, legging is still useful to reduce slippage. Depending on your brokerage, execution of single contracts is more reliable than execution of spreads. (This appears true of Robinhood, for instance.)



### Seeding

A strategy that I invented but have never really been able to succeed with is what I call "seeding." This refers to buying cheap, 1 or 5 dollar contracts preemptively, in an assortment of underlying stocks which you suspect might jump or sink in the future.

Many of these will expire worthless, but sometimes a stock will move in a direction that favors the "seed." At this point you have two choices: if the seed has grown in value substantially, you may choose to just sell the option at a handsome percentage profit.

However, if the underlying moves but the seed hasn't meaningfully grown, all is not lost: You can short an option nearer to market price, building a spread. The seed allows you to do this in a very capital efficient way.

I suspect that such a strategy could be effective in low volatility environments, when opportunities are rare. This has not been the case for the last year or more.


### Calendar spreads

Similar in spirit to seeding, you can buy the defensive leg of a spread but choose a long expiration. Then, you can short weekly contracts with reduced collateral, week after week until the expiration of the defensive leg arrives.

I have tried this strategy but find that it generally does not work well. This is akin to buying a season pass for shorting weeklys with reduced collateral. The pass doesn't work very well, for the same reason that buying in bulk is a burden. One way to think about this is that in the absence of such a season pass, you would probably vary the strike price of your defensive leg depending on the circumstance of that week. The season pass disallows this.

However, this might be a viable strategy in a low volatility environment, or on a low volatility stock.
