---
title: "The case against options Greeks"
---

The Black-Scholes model for options pricing is a very nice piece of mathematics. However, I am not familiar with the theoretical or notational significance for the associated options Greeks. They may very well be convenient for some analysis.

Regardless, traders have adopted the Greeks for their own purposes, as the "correct" quantitative properties to use when trading options. They are discussed in any introduction to options. Unfortunately, I am not aware of any reason to think that they are useful for trading options. I am reminded of this [interview](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=VW6LYuli7VU) with Richard Feynman:

Here is a transcript of the relevant anecdote:

> My cousin at that time - who was three years older - was in high school and was having considerable difficulty with his algebra, and had a tutor. I was allowed to sit in the corner while the tutor tried to teach my cousin algebra. I said to my cousin then, "What are you trying to do?" I hear him talking about x, you know.
> 
> "Well, you know, 2x + 7 is equal to 15," he said, "and I'm trying to figure out what x is," and I says, "You mean 4." He says, "Yeah, but you did it by arithmetic. You have to do it by algebra."
> 
> And that's why my cousin was never able to do algebra, because he didn't understand how he was supposed to do it. I learned algebra, fortunately, by - not going to school - by knowing the whole idea was to find out what x was and it didn't make any difference how you did it. There's no such a thing as, you know, you don't do it by arithmetic, you do it by algebra. It was a false thing that they had invented in school, so that the children who have to study algebra can all pass it. They had invented a set of rules, which if you followed them without thinking, could produce the answer. Subtract 7 from both sides. If you have a multiplier, divide both sides by the multiplier. And so on. A series of steps by which you could get the answer if you didn't understand what you were trying to do. 


### Unnecessary obfuscation

It is perhaps not the fault of the typical algebra student for not understanding what they are trying to do in algebra class. But options trading is different. We know very well what we are trying to do.

For instance, we often want to look for stocks with high volatility, because such stocks correspond to options chains with high premiums. Implied volatility doesn't do a terrible job of this, but it is difficult to understand the mathematical relationship between implied volatility and premiums, beyond some form of direct proportionality. It is also difficult to compute, and because of this, is not well standardized or updated across brokers and screeners. 

All of this is particularly egregious, however, because anyone looking for options with high premiums can simply look for options with high premiums!


### Harmful obfuscation

My general thesis is that focusing on the Greeks distracts from other considerations that actually offer improvement, and which your competition is certainly employing.

When choosing a quantitative method by which to appraise the price of an option, the complexity of your mathematics has little bearing on its effectiveness. In fact, chances are that the more complex your mathematics, the less effective it will be. Roughly speaking, a complex algorithm that no one can understand probably operates on a time or frequency scale invisible to humans. This means it must occur on very short time scales, very long time scales, or require a huge number of trials before becoming effective. None of these are appreciable by the typical retail trader.

Much more important than the complexity of the algorithm is the breadth of the data you are accessing. The options Greeks are essentially derived from, and subordinate to, the Black Scholes model; they have nothing more to offer. There are a few implications:

1. The Greeks rely exclusively on historical data for the underlying. Relying on them alone is unforgiveable, especially because the current market prices for options offer new relevant information. This even includes, for instance, implied volatility.
2. The Greeks are blind even to a large portion of available historical data, as is the Black Scholes model. Recent price history and volume has far greater dimensionality than a scalar standard deviation, which is essentially the sole input to the Black Scholes model.
3. Once a calculator has spit out a Black Scholes valuation of an option and this has been taken into account, there is little value in studying the Greeks. Further analysis will not improve effectiveness, just like insisting on a proposed perpetual motion machine will not disprove thermodynamics.

Finally, Warren Buffett has discussed options on a couple of occasions. In one [shareholder meeting](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Fd4lfVNJljk), he discusses why he appreciates the insanity of the Black Scholes model:

The primary responsibility of a trader should not be to understand universal pricing models or algorithmic strategies. Calculators and computers do a far better job of this  (and in any case, your strategy should be very simple). Rather, the trader should be primarily occupied by trying to understand the underlying to gain an opportunistic edge.
