---
title: "Tactics VII: Building an optimal trade"
---

This post ties together three related questions:

1. We revisit the question of how often your trades should [lose]({% post_url 2021-08-07-wheeling-rolling %}).
2. We revisit the question of choosing strikes, or equivalently, [rates of return]({% post_url 2021-07-05-choosing-strikes %}).
3. We consider the new question of position sizing.

The unifying theme that fixes these decisions is the search for inefficiency.



### Revisiting loss frequency

I stated in the previous discussion about wheeling and rolling that you should aim to lose at least sometimes, to indicate a criticial level of capital efficiency. Note that a literal loss is unnecessary; even a close call, is a sufficient indicator of appropriate aggressiveness.

It is pretty obvious that never losing is not optimal; It's pretty easy to never lose trades but this is inconsistent with the actual objective, which is profit. (For instance, one easy way to never lose is to never trade.)

It is less obvious that the optimal percentage of losses is not some higher positive number, and in fact, it very well might be. The idea there would be that although losses are larger and more frequent, so are premiums. My suspicion however is that this is not the optimal regime.

Allow me to model the question more concretely. We can roughly interpret the options market as an opaque mix of fair bets on one hand, but also risk, leverage, and speculative instruments, on the other. In fact, we might view the premium attached to each contract as being apportioned for these two purposes.

As a seller in this market, you want almost none of your capital to be used on fair bets. Such capital is purely wasted, since it has an expected return of zero. But the fact that the buyer sometimes wins indicates precisely that the contract has some positive value apportioned into its value as a fair bet. This means that for a pure options seller with no interest in fair bets, the best contracts almost never lose.

The remaining ambiguity comes from the fact that the value of an options contract as a financial instrument rises together with its value as a fair bet. It's conceivable that being forced to enter some capital into a fair bet is just the cost of doing business, with the promise of greater reward via financial-instrument earnings. 

However, the fair-bet value of an option grows very rapidly as one gets closer to market price, with Gaussian or exponential behavior. On the contrary, it's reasonable to believe that the financial-instrument value of an option is much more flat. I would model it by a shallow linear function plus a step function. Linear growth comes from the value of the instrument as collateral, while there is a step where people begin to derive value from peace of mind and speculative entertainment. Minimum tick size also adds a little step to the collateral value.

The optimal contract would be right past the step, as it quickly becomes swamped by the fair-best Gaussian. 


### Revisiting strikes

Given the above discussion about losses, we have a slightly more concrete recommendation for how to choose a strike, beyond ["try to earn less."]({% post_url 2021-07-05-choosing-strikes %}) Aim to almost never lose, but only just so.

Is there a way to quantitatively benchmark this? I suggested rate of return in a previous post, but this is sometimes confounded with opportunities where rate of return is inflated while genuine risk is not.

Standard deviation of stock price is another possibility, but this data is pretty soft and suffers from "garbage in, garbage out."

Volume is a promising alternative, as illiquidity is indicative of an unfair bet. However, note that often, strikes may have low volumes simply because of round-number affinity. For instance, a 50 dollar strike may capture all the volume, leaving the 51 dollar strike with almost no volume, but this is a meaningless piece of information from the perspective of the risk of assignment. A more accurate criteria may be some measure of cumulative volume.


### Position sizing

It wasn't obvious to me at first whether confidence as a result of a good opportunity should manifest in terms of chasing a more aggressive rate of return, or more aggressive sizing. The above discussion regarding how to choose strikes might suggest that this degree of freedom is artificial. Then confidence should be incorporated via sizing, apparently the last remaining discretionary quantity. (Note that sizing is just the quantitative way of asking whether you should open a given trade.)

However, I recently learned about the Kelly criterion for position sizing, which suggests that the discretion here can also be optimized away. The apparently optimal sizing for a double-or-nothing bet, as a proportion of your assets, is p - q, where p is the probability of winning and q is the probability of losing.

For uneven bets, p and q should be scaled accordingly. For instance, I would estimate that a typical loss on a bad options trade is about 20%. Then p should be scaled by 5. If a typical win is about 2%, then q should be scaled by 50. If 5% of trades go bad, the criterion actually suggests you should leverage. If 10% of trades go bad, then the trade is losing and should be avoided.

This explains my initial indecision on how to incorporate variable confidence into the parameters for a trade. As discussed above, an optimal strategy should aim to keep p constant, near 1. If you place stop losses, you also control the size of a typical loss. Then the Kelly criterion says that correct sizing is determined entirely by the rate of return - which again is determined by p.


### Discretion

We have discussed an optimization for every free quantity in building a trade. Where does the trader insert discretion in building a trade?

My answer: Sizing. 

I hinted at the reason above. Sizing is the quantitative way of asking whether you should open a given trade. This is already an inevitable part of discretionary trading. Further, estimating the precise value of p is a hopeless endeavor. The win and loss scalings in typical options trades are so unforgiving of error that the Kelly criterion formula is impractical.

However, I will close by remarking on an interesting consequence of the Kelly criterion: The trades on which you choose a more aggressive rate of return, should also be sized larger! This relies on the belief that an optimal strategy should choose trades with a fixed chance of winning. This fixes p and q in the Kelly criterion, which causes sizing and rate of return to move in the same direction: You should bet bigger on trades with better returns.
